The important role played by non-profit organizations in delivering
social services to the population has been highlighted by @salamon1995,
@wolch1989, and @hall1998, who have quantified the scale of the
non-profit social service sector in terms of number of organizations and
employees, and amount of government funds received.[^1]

Scholars have advanced a variety of theories to explain the enormous
growth in the non-profit sector’s role in delivering social services and
to explicate the benefits and drawbacks of this model of collective
service provision. Traditionally, the presence of the voluntary sector
in social service provision has been considered to be the result of a
combined “market failure,” characterized by an inability for consumers
to privately procure needed services, and a “government failure” of the
state to collectively provide these services through public welfare
state institutions [@salamon1995]. According to these theories, the
voluntary sector steps in to provide social services when the state and
market fail to do so. @salamon1995 argues against these reductive
explanations and counterposes that much of the growth of voluntary
sector social service provision is the result of government investment
in the sector through partnerships between state funding agencies and
non-profit organizations who utilize public funds to deliver services.
Salamon situates these partnerships within a larger trend of
“third-party government”, by which the role of government as a
fundraiser and funder has become separated from its role as a direct
service provider [@salamon1995 PAGE]. In support of this claim, Salamon
finds that the massive growth in the reach and size of the U.S. federal
government in the period of welfare state expansion between the 1950s
and 1980s was enacted through partnerships between the federal
government, lower levels of government, for-profit industry, and the
non-profit sector. In this period, government growth occurred primarily
in its capacity to procure and distribute funds, without a concomitant
increase in the scale of direct government program delivery. Instead,
these responsibilities became increasingly assumed by private and
non-profit organizations, who utilized public funds to deliver services
through private institutional forms.

@milward1994 conceives that this split between the government’s active
role in procuring and distributing funds and its reduced role in direct
service provision reflects a tendency towards the state becoming a
“hollow state.” @wolch1989 [201], meanwhile argues that the expanded
role played by the voluntary sector in delivering publicly funded social
services has led to the formation of “a shadow state … a para-state
apparatus with collective service responsibilities previously shouldered
by the public sector, administered outside democratic politics, but yet
controlled in both formal and informal ways by the state.”

Political support for the voluntary sector to assume an increased role
in delivering social services has come from both the right and the left.
Conservative arguments call for “mediating institutions” such as
voluntary organizations to play a more active role in social service in
order to guard against and reduce undue government interference into the
private lives of the citizenry.[^2] Progressive arguments position
voluntary sector social service provision as an addition to rather than
a replacement for public social welfare services and as a means for
people to assume more autonomy over the welfare of their
communities.[^3] While the latter view paints a rosy picture in which
voluntary sector social services increase the stock of social welfare
and further the realization of social justice in a given community, the
literature identifies several issues which collectively suggest that
devolution from the state to the community may have the opposite effect
by reducing access to basic entitlements and necessary social services
by vulnerable segments of the population.

@salamon1995 identifies four forms of “voluntary failure” that may
render the voluntary sector ill-equipped to take on responsibility for
welfare provision in the absence of state support. For one, as
organizations reliant upon voluntary contributions, non-profit social
service agencies would face difficulties in securing the funds required
to deliver vital social services. A potentially significant source of
non-state funding is from tax-deductible donations made by wealthy
individuals, foundations, and corporations. However, relying upon these
sources is problematic given that these donors often prefer to donate to
arts and cultural organizations and educational institutions than to
social services organizations that work in marginalized communities.
Furthermore, reliance upon wealthy donors may usher in a form of
“philanthropic paternalism” [@salamon1995 PAGE] as the donors who foot
large portions of the bill for social service programming may make their
contributions conditional in order to shape the content of services and
programs as well as criteria defining target groups who are eligible to
access these services.

Conversely, foregoing large donations and relying upon communities of
service users to fund the costs of the services they access through
small donations or user fees presents its own issues. While this
approach may be beneficial in furthering local control over the
provision of social welfare services in a community, in practice service
levels would likely be inadequate in economically marginalized
communities. The same shortage of income and assets that makes social
services necessary in the first place would make it unlikely that
community members requiring these services would have the resources to
pay for their provision. Finally, periods of economic downturn would be
especially problematic for social service agencies reliant upon private
contributions. At such times, when an increased proportion of the
population requires access to social welfare supports, agencies’ ability
to procure funding from user fees and individual donations would be
further reduced.

[^1]: Insert references: @salamon1993 with national statistics;
    @hall1998 with Canadian data; @geiger1986 and @wolch1989 with local
    data on Los Angeles.

[^2]: A means to fill gaps in a scaled down welfare state. Also
    arguments about efficiency, increasing consumer choice, allowing for
    market competition, not stifling private initiative [@wolch1989
    200-1].

[^3]: A means to provide additional social services above and beyond
    those provided by an encompassing welfare state. Potential for
    participatory democracy, local control over community welfare,
    flexibility to meet community needs in creative ways, more
    accountable to service users than massive, hierarchical state
    bureaucracies [@wolch1989 201-202].
