Given that access to benefits programs operate by brokering access to
the current complement of social welfare benefits, my analysis of the
potential for these programs to enhance social and economic justice
necessitates a theory of the welfare state. Assuming an ideal situation
in which access programs were tremendously successful in connecting
community members to all welfare state entitlements, would sufficient
redistribution occur to ensure that all residents receive the income and
services needed to sustain the conditions of life? Or conversely, does
socioeconomic justice require more than the redistribution that can be
accomplished through 100% take-up of the current complement of welfare
state benefits?

The literature is mixed with respect to the role that the welfare state
should play as a lever for socioeconomic justice and the extent to which
liberal welfare states have fulfilled this role in practice.[^1] On one
pole, T.H. Marshall offers a strong normative statement in favor of
state intervention in support of socioeconomic justice. Writing in 1949,
Marshall argues that social welfare provision is the next logical step
in a historical progression through which liberal states have expanded
the rights of their citizenry and worked towards equality among
citizens. Building upon civil rights and political rights, which have
been enacted to varying degrees depending on one’s geographical and
social location, social citizenship include “the right to a modicum of
economic welfare and security \[and\] the right to share to the full in
the social heritage and to live the life of a civilised being according
to the standards prevailing in the society” [@marshall1950 11]. There is
a clear affinity between Marshall’s ideal of social citizenship and the
vision for socioeconomic justice I derive from Fraser and Noonan.
Accordingly, programs working within a socially democratic welfare
regime may contribute to the realization of socioeconomic justice
through supporting access to universal entitlements by groups that face
particular barriers.

Conversely, critical analyses of the social welfare benefits and
services offered by liberal welfare states suggest that they have fallen
short of Marshall’s ideal. Rather than aspiring to provide all citizens
with the resources needed to fully participate in the life of the
society, the welfare states of Canada, the United States, and the United
Kingdom, among others, instead remain predicated upon the British Poor
Laws, which offer aid as a last resort and ensure that it is less
desirable than the prevailing wages available in the market (the
principle of “less eligibility”). Given that movements of the working
poor have argued that minimum wage employment does not provide the
living wage required to sustain life, it is apparent that welfare
benefits specifically designed to offer less than the prevailing market
wage will be insufficient, even if access programs successfully connect
vulnerable groups to these benefits.

Furthermore, critics have argued that the expansion of the welfare state
benefits throughout history has not been part of a benevolent
progression towards social citizenship, but rather a cycle of expansion
and contraction intended to regulate the supply of labour. Piven and
Cloward’s analysis of the American welfare state finds that the
availability of what they term “poor relief” is increased at times of
mass social upheaval, and then subsequently reduced once economic
stability was restored [-@piven1993]. Piven and Cloward argue that the
mass expansion of the American welfare state through the 1930s New Deal
and the 1960s Great Society programs was motivated less by a benevolent
concern for the welfare of a disadvantaged populace and more by a
calculated assessment of the level of state intervention needed to
maintain social order and ensure profitable conditions for capital.
Following this logic, if a liberal welfare state is designed to mitigate
the self-defeating harmful effects of capitalism rather than to provide
for the enjoyment of social citizenship by the populace, aid will be
extended and withdrawn according to factors extrinsic to the level of
human need. Thus even if access to income benefits is secured and human
needs are satisfied, changes to the welfare state – including reduced
generosity of benefits and punitive treatment of benefit recipients –
may be introduced in order to discipline benefit recipients to re-enter
the labor market.

The critical literature also identifies several inequalities that affect
the forms of benefits for which specific demographics qualify, the
relative generosity of these benefits, and the social relations that
shape how benefit recipients are treated by state agencies as well as by
fellow citizens. A fundamental inequality persists along the axis of
class, dividing individuals with earned employment or investment income
from individuals with allegedly “unearned” income. While the former
group benefits primarily from fiscal welfare policies implemented
through the personal income tax system, the latter rely on social
welfare benefits delivered outside the tax system
[@abramovitz1983; @titmuss1965]. A similar divide separates individuals
who have worked in the paid labour market for a sufficient period of
time from those who do not meet this criteria. The first group are
eligible to receive social insurance benefits that have been designed to
partially replace the income lost as a result of retirement, disability,
parenthood, and involuntary job loss, and among other life events, and
that index benefit amounts to employee contributions. The latter group
does not qualify for these benefits and is instead forced to rely upon
social assistance programs [@olsen2002].

The differences between fiscal welfare and social insurance programs, on
the one hand, and social assistance programs, on the other, are
significant. Benefit levels are higher in contribution-based programs
than they are in programs reliant upon means tests. The aggregate
expenditures on fiscal welfare measures far outstrip social welfare
spending [@abramovitz1983]. Most saliently, accessing social assistance
requires recipients to subject themselves to means tests, the
surveillance of benefit administrators and investigators, and a litany
of rules and regulations that define what they must do in order to
remain eligible for benefits and which social and economic behaviours
are disallowed. Receipt of social assistance is moreover stigmatized in
the dominant social discourse, and social assistance recipients are
portrayed as dependent upon unearned handouts from the state
[@fraser1994; @fraser1992]. Conversely, beneficiaries of fiscal welfare
measures and social insurance programs are considered in a more
favorable light: as accessing the just rewards they deserve as a result
of their economic contributions as income earners and taxpayers.

Class is not the only axis of inequality that shapes and is shaped by
the welfare state; class intersects with gender, ‘race,’ ethnicity,
citizenship and residency status, indigeneity, and other factors to form
a stratified welfare system in which the benefits for which an
individual qualifies are to a large extent determined by their social
location. The literature identifies a number of examples of how welfare
state rules and regulations systemically disadvantage particular groups
of people. Social insurance programs do not count the unpaid domestic
labour performed primarily by women as employment, and thereby fail to
recognize this labour when assessing eligibility for contribution-based
benefits. Social assistance programs have also served to regulate and
restrict the social behaviour of women through restricting the provision
of aid to widows and mothers, denying aid to women who live with a “man
in the house”, or assuming the existence of romantic and economic
relationships between unrelated men and women living in the same
household. The result in all of these cases is that the welfare state
draws upon and reinforces the injustice faced by women living in poverty
by assuming the male breadwinner as the primary economic actor and
relegating women to a secondary position of dependency.

Inequality also pervades along lines of ‘race’, citizenship and
residency status, and indigeneity. Racialized communities have been
systematically excluded from receipt of social assistance benefits in
order to reinforce their dependence on low-wage jobs that exploit their
labour. Indigenous peoples have had their social assistance benefits
channeled through parallel systems that may be underfunded, or through
colonial systems that fail to recognize their particular experiences.
Finally, first generation immigrants, including refugees and temporary
workers, have been denied access to welfare state benefits due to their
residency status as temporary workers or undocumented immigrants, or in
spite of attaining permanent residence status or citizenship, as a
result of having not lived in the country for a sufficient length of
time.

The above review suggests that the liberal welfare state falls well
short of Marshall’s ideal of social citizenship. Minimum benefit levels
offered through social assistance programs are insufficient to sustain
the necessities of life by virtue of the design requirement that social
assistance should be “less eligible” than minimum wage labour. Community
members receiving social assistance benefits are subjected to
disempowering treatment by benefit administrators and by public
discourse that stigmatizes receipt of welfare as pathological
dependence. Finally, inequalities based on class, gender, and ‘race’
endure, affecting both the forms of benefits for which an individual
qualifies and the generosity of these benefits.

My analysis of the potential for access to benefits programs to
contribute to socioeconomic justice must therefore consider the specific
benefits being accessed through these programs, the demographic groups
gaining access to these benefits, and the extent to which specific
benefits provide for the necessities of life while respecting the
dignity and autonomy of recipients. Furthermore, this review calls
critical attention to the intervention strategies employed by access
programs. How do the injustices inherent in liberal welfare state
constrain programs focused primarily on securing access to welfare state
benefits? Are there unintended harms that could result from the
inclusion of vulnerable community members as benefit recipients?
Finally, if access to benefits programs broaden their approach beyond
direct service delivery, what strategies could be effective in pushing
the state to assume greater responsibility for social citizenship?

[^1]: Although the literature cited in this section predominantly draws
    from a British ideal of social citizenship and American critiques of
    their exceptionally residual welfare state, the theories I draw upon
    are also valuable in the Canadian context. While Canada’s universal
    social welfare services (including public health care) and
    categorical entitlements may distinguish Canada as a “social
    liberal” welfare state (Olsen), it shares many commonalities with
    the liberal welfare states that feature more prominently in the
    literature. Most importantly for the purposes of this project,
    Canadian social assistance programs also stem from the British Poor
    Laws, and social assistance remains a benefit of last resort rather
    than a universal or categorical citizens’ entitlement.
