Introduction
============

The dawn of the neoliberal era in the last decades of the 20th century
ushered in a fundamental restructuring of the state apparatus, notably
including a retrenchment of the public social welfare regimes that had
been developed earlier in the century. A primary means by which
restructuring has occurred is through devolution of responsibility for
social services from the state to the private and non-profit sectors.
According to @wolch1989 [217], this devolution has led to the formation
of a “shadow state apparatus” consisting of non-governmental
organizations that are endowed with responsibility to provide collective
social welfare supports and are situated outside of the statutory
welfare regime. While @wolch1989 [202] finds that theorists from across
the political spectrum have advocated for non-governmental organizations
to assume a greater role in delivering social welfare supports, the
literature abounds with criticisms which highlight that a primary
motivation for and effect of devolution is to support the ongoing
neoliberal project.

Critiques of Devolution
-----------------------

-   Decrease in social welfare
    -   Some geographic areas and organizations have greater access to
        resources and services than others, while vulnerable communities
        may have less access.
    -   Reliance upon user fees is especially problematic for
        vulnerable communities.
    -   Easier to withdraw funding from NGOs than to eliminate direct
        government programming.
-   Reduces government accountability for social inequality and
    associated problems [@macdonald2011]

-   Furthers the colonization of society with neoliberal ways of being
    -   Organizations must compete for funding
        -   Branding and marketing
        -   Business and entrepreneurial activities
        -   Restrictions on activities in order to remain fundable.
        -   NGO industrial complex
    -   Stress on efficiency
        -   Lower wages and costs than public sector employment
        -   Flexible labour
    -   Encourages the development of neoliberal dispositions among
        citizens accessing supports
        -   Model of self-help instead of public welfare and basic
            entitlement

Progressive Potential
---------------------

-   May increase local autonomy
-   Political clout of the voluntary sector could pressure the state for
    increased entitlements
-   Could extend the range of social welfare services available rather
    than fill service gaps caused by retrenchment
-   Can mobilize resistance among vulnerable groups and advocates of
    social justice
-   Human-scale, community organizations rather than “iron cage”
    government bureaucracies.

Research Question
=================

-   This project will assess the progressive potential of delivering
    social welfare supports through the non-profit sector, and explicate
    factors that contribute to and counteract the voluntary sector’s
    capacity to work for progressive social change.
    -   Can non-profit social welfare organizations contribute to
        broader social transformation beyond immediate service delivery?
        -   Can shadow state organizations deliver services in a manner
            that is compatible with a broader vision for social change?
    -   What factors contribute to and counteract the non-profit
        sector’s capacity to contribute to progressive social change?
-   What are the benefits and drawbacks of delivering social welfare
    services/supports through the voluntary sector?
    -   Are there additional benefits to service recipients that derive
        from accessing supports from non-profit organizations rather
        than from government institutions?

Theoretical Lens
----------------

-   I will draw upon and apply two theories of radical social change to
    assess the progressive potential of providing social welfare
    supports through the non-profit sector: strategic and
    prefigurative politics.
    -   Strategic:
        -   What factors contribute to and counteract the sector’s
            capacity to advocate for systemic, structural change in
            government programs and policies?
    -   Prefigurative:
        -   What factors contribute to and counteract the sector’s
            capacity to contribute towards changes in the everyday lives
            of community members, including cultural and relational
            transformation?
        -   To what extent can prefigurative politics be practiced in
            the shadow state?
        -   Is there an affinity between prefigurative politics and the
            model of social change being practiced by social welfare
            NGOs?
        -   Does the devolution of social welfare service provision to
            the voluntary sector provide additional opportunities for
            the practice of prefigurative politics in the process of
            service deliver?
-   Tension between these two theories concerning the role that formal
    organizations should play in efforts to achieve radical
    social change.
    -   Can non-profit social welfare service providers be leveraged by
        movements for radical social change?

Methodology
===========

-   This project will draw upon a qualititative research methodology and
    employ three research methods:

1.  Literature review
    -   Synthesizing and connecting literature on the benefits and
        drawbacks of devolving social welfare services to the shadow
        state, and how devolution can contribute to or counteract the
        realization of social justice.
    -   Literature on:
        -   The shadow state and social service devolution
        -   Radical social change, prefigurative politics, participatory
            democracy
        -   People-centered systems / systems that work well from the
            perspective of the user

2.  Autoethnography
    -   An autoethnographical analysis of my experience developing and
        delivering social welfare programs to low-income communities as
        a program co-ordinator at SEED Winnipeg.

3.  Informal expert interviews
    -   Informal expert interviews with program delivery staff and
        directors at SEED Winnipeg, who have experience developing,
        managing, and delivering community-based social
        welfare programs.


